<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII: A Yellow Journal</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Yellow Journal</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Skaggs had no qualms of conscience about the manner in which he had come by the damaging evidence against Maurice Oakley. It was enough for him that he had it. A corporation, he argued, had no soul, and therefore no conscience. How much less, then, should so small a part of a great corporation as himself be expected to have them?</p>
			<p>He had his story. It was vivid, interesting, dramatic. It meant the favour of his editor, a big thing for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Universe</i>, and a fatter lining for his own pocket. He sat down to put his discovery on paper before he attempted anything else, although the impulse to celebrate was very strong within him.</p>
			<p>He told his story well, with an eye to every one of its salient points. He sent an alleged picture of Berry Hamilton as he had appeared at the time of his arrest. He sent a picture of the Oakley home and of the cottage where the servant and his family had been so happy. There was a strong pen-picture of the man, Oakley, grown haggard and morose from carrying his guilty secret, of his confusion when confronted with the supposed knowledge of it. The old Southern city was described, and the opinions of its residents in regard to the case given. It was there⁠—clear, interesting, and strong. One could see it all as if every phase of it were being enacted before one’s eyes. Skaggs surpassed himself.</p>
			<p>When the editor first got hold of it he said “Huh!” over the opening lines,⁠—a few short sentences that instantly pricked the attention awake. He read on with increasing interest. “This is good stuff,” he said at the last page. “Here’s a chance for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Universe</i> to look into the methods of Southern court proceedings. Here’s a chance for a spread.”</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Universe</i> had always claimed to be the friend of all poor and oppressed humanity, and every once in a while it did something to substantiate its claim, whereupon it stood off and said to the public, “Look you what we have done, and behold how great we are, the friend of the people!” The <i>Universe</i> was yellow. It was very so. But it had power and keenness and energy. It never lost an opportunity to crow, and if one was not forthcoming, it made one. In this way it managed to do a considerable amount of good, and its yellowness became forgivable, even commendable. In Skaggs’s story the editor saw an opportunity for one of its periodical philanthropies. He seized upon it. With headlines that took half a page, and with cuts authentic and otherwise, the tale was told, and the people of New York were greeted next morning with the announcement of⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>“A Burning Shame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Poor and Innocent Negro made to Suffer for a Rich Man’s Crime!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great Exposé by the ‘Universe’!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ‘Universe’ Reporter to the Rescue!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Whole Thing to be Aired that the People may Know!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Then Skaggs received a telegram that made him leap for joy. He was to do it. He was to go to the capital of the State. He was to beard the Governor in his den, and he, with the force of a great paper behind him, was to demand for the people the release of an innocent man. Then there would be another write-up and much glory for him and more shekels. In an hour after he had received his telegram he was on his way to the Southern capital.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Meanwhile in the house of Maurice Oakley there were sad times. From the moment that the master of the house had fallen to the floor in impotent fear and madness there had been no peace within his doors. At first his wife had tried to control him alone, and had humoured the wild babblings with which he woke from his swoon. But these changed to shrieks and cries and curses, and she was forced to throw open the doors so long closed and call in help. The neighbours and her old friends went to her assistance, and what the reporter’s story had not done, the ravings of the man accomplished; for, with a show of matchless cunning, he continually clutched at his breast, laughed, and babbled his secret openly. Even then they would have smothered it in silence, for the honour of one of their best families; but too many ears had heard, and then came the yellow journal bearing all the news in emblazoned headlines.</p>
			<p>Colonel Saunders was distinctly hurt to think that his confidence had been imposed on, and that he had been instrumental in bringing shame upon a Southern name.</p>
			<p>“To think, suh,” he said generally to the usual assembly of choice spirits,⁠—“to think of that man’s being a reporter, suh, a common, ordinary reporter, and that I sat and talked to him as if he were a gentleman!”</p>
			<p>“You’re not to be blamed, Colonel,” said old Horace Talbot. “You’ve done no more than any other gentleman would have done. The trouble is that the average Northerner has no sense of honour, suh, no sense of honour. If this particular man had had, he would have kept still, and everything would have gone on smooth and quiet. Instead of that, a distinguished family is brought to shame, and for what? To give a nigger a few more years of freedom when, likely as not, he don’t want it; and Berry Hamilton’s life in prison has proved nearer the ideal reached by slavery than anything he has found since emancipation. Why, suhs, I fancy I see him leaving his prison with tears of regret in his eyes.”</p>
			<p>Old Horace was inanely eloquent for an hour over his pet theory. But there were some in the town who thought differently about the matter, and it was their opinions and murmurings that backed up Skaggs and made it easier for him when at the capital he came into contact with the official red tape.</p>
			<p>He was told that there were certain forms of procedure, and certain times for certain things, but he hammered persistently away, the murmurings behind him grew louder, while from his sanctum the editor of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Universe</i> thundered away against oppression and high-handed tyranny. Other papers took it up and asked why this man should be despoiled of his liberty any longer? And when it was replied that the man had been convicted, and that the wheels of justice could not be stopped or turned back by the letter of a romantic artist or the ravings of a madman, there was a mighty outcry against the farce of justice that had been played out in this man’s case.</p>
			<p>The trial was reviewed; the evidence again brought up and examined. The dignity of the State was threatened. At this time the State did the one thing necessary to save its tottering reputation. It would not surrender, but it capitulated, and Berry Hamilton was pardoned.</p>
			<p>Berry heard the news with surprise and a half-bitter joy. He had long ago lost hope that justice would ever be done to him. He marvelled at the word that was brought to him now, and he could not understand the strange cordiality of the young white man who met him at the warden’s office. Five years of prison life had made a different man of him. He no longer looked to receive kindness from his fellows, and he blinked at it as he blinked at the unwonted brightness of the sun. The lines about his mouth where the smiles used to gather had changed and grown stern with the hopelessness of years. His lips drooped pathetically, and hard treatment had given his eyes a lowering look. His hair, that had hardly shown a white streak, was as white as Maurice Oakley’s own. His erstwhile quick wits were dulled and imbruted. He had lived like an ox, working without inspiration or reward, and he came forth like an ox from his stall. All the higher part of him he had left behind, dropping it off day after day through the wearisome years. He had put behind him the Berry Hamilton that laughed and joked and sang and believed, for even his faith had become only a numbed fancy.</p>
			<p>“This is a very happy occasion, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hamilton,” said Skaggs, shaking his hand heartily.</p>
			<p>Berry did not answer. What had this slim, glib young man to do with him? What had any white man to do with him after what he had suffered at their hands?</p>
			<p>“You know you are to go New York with me?”</p>
			<p>“To New Yawk? What fu’?”</p>
			<p>Skaggs did not tell him that, now that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Universe</i> had done its work, it demanded the right to crow to its heart’s satisfaction. He said only, “You want to see your wife, of course?”</p>
			<p>Berry had forgotten Fannie, and for the first time his heart thrilled within him at the thought of seeing her again.</p>
			<p>“I ain’t hyeahed f’om my people fu’ a long time. I didn’t know what had become of ’em. How’s Kit an’ Joe?”</p>
			<p>“They’re all right,” was the reply. Skaggs couldn’t tell him, in this the first hour of his freedom. Let him have time to drink the sweetness of that all in. There would be time afterwards to taste all of the bitterness.</p>
			<p>Once in New York, he found that people wished to see him, some fools, some philanthropists, and a great many reporters. He had to be photographed⁠—all this before he could seek those whom he longed to see. They printed his picture as he was before he went to prison and as he was now, a sort of before-and-after-taking comment, and in the morning that it all appeared, when the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Universe</i> spread itself to tell the public what it had done and how it had done it, they gave him his wife’s address.</p>
			<p>It would be better, they thought, for her to tell him herself all that happened. No one of them was brave enough to stand to look in his eyes when he asked for his son and daughter, and they shifted their responsibility by pretending to themselves that they were doing it for his own good: that the blow would fall more gently upon him coming from her who had been his wife. Berry took the address and inquired his way timidly, hesitatingly, but with a swelling heart, to the door of the flat where Fannie lived.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
